Testnet and Vision description (#77)
movementlabsxyz/movement-docs: docs/general/Mainnet/node_level_architecture.md

---
sidebar_position: 2
---

# Node-level architecture

## Node Types

### Full node

A full node provides the entire functionality of a Movement node:

- ingresses transactions into a local mempool

> - forms proto-blocks from the transactions in the mempool and forwards them

Reviewer: what is a proto-block exactly?  Is this is block as part of a chain, header etc, or an ordered list of transactions or batch?

Author: thx this is wrong. the set of transactions sent to the DA via the DA-light-client are called blobs. The ordered set of transactions read from the DA is called protoblobs (currently have 15seconds intervals due to the frequency of celestia tendermint). i have fixed the comments.

  to the [DA light node](#da-light-node)
- runs executions of blocks sequenced by the DA,
  receiving them through the DA light node.
- provides views on the optimistic and settled (finalized) states via
  Aptos RPC API endpoints.
- (in a future decentralized network) can operate as a [validator node](#validator-node) with a key from the trusted validator set.

> 

Reviewer: Do we want to maybe look at what it means to run each one of these nodes practically here also?

Author: this seems a requirements question which should be answered by @rolandoesparza

### Validator node

A validator node is a full node that is part of the trusted validator set which settles blocks via the [Fast-Finality-Settlement](high_level_architecture.md#settlement).

### Follower Node

The Movement [Follower Node][follower] is a node type introduced for RPC providers. A follower node

> performs most of the functions provided by the full node, except settlement of blocks.

Reviewer: Isn't it the validator that settles blocks?

Author: yes. @mzabaluev i see you added this. how does the follower node differ from the full node?

As such, it does not need access to a private key from the trusted validator set. 
Follower Nodes help the Movement Network to scale by providing increased transaction ingress capacity and horizontal scaling for queries over chain state.

> [follower]: https://github.com/movementlabsxyz/movement/tree/main/docs/movement-node/run/manual/follower-node

Reviewer: Ah to my previous comment on the practicalities, nice, should we be inlining documentation for each node such as this?  I would think we would want this a one stop of all components leading to manuals etc.

Author: seems a good idea. please go ahead

### DA Light node

The DA light node is a standalone service which performs these categories of operations:

1. Write: the light node sequences the signed proto-blocks submitted by authorized nodes
   in a locally ordered mempool to periodically write them, sequenced in L2 blocks,
   to the data availability layer.
2. Read: the light node reads the blobs from the data availability layer and verifies them
   against its verification parameters, currently by verifying a trusted signature.
3. Parameter update (to be implemented): updates parameters of verification, blob data format,
   and the DA namespace.

The DA light node provides access to these operation via a gRPC API.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe more details on the API could be shared here

Author: yes that would be nice

- Can operate as a [Validator Node](#validator-node) with a key from the trusted validator set.
- Can operate as a [Follower_Node](#follower-node) which removes the requirement to write batches to the DA.
- Can operate as an [Archival Node](#archival-node) which removes the requirement to write to DA and settle to Layer 1 with FFS.

### Validator node

A validator node is a full node that is part of the trusted validator set, which settles blocks via the [Fast-Finality-Settlement](high_level_architecture.md#settlement).

### Follower Node

The Movement [Follower Node][follower] is a node type introduced for RPC providers. A follower node
performs most of the functions provided by the full node, except settlement of blocks.
As such, it does not need access to a private key from the trusted validator set. 
Follower Nodes help the Movement Network to scale by providing increased transaction ingress capacity and horizontal scaling for queries over chain state.

[follower]: https://github.com/movementlabsxyz/movement/tree/main/docs/movement-node/run/manual/follower-node

### DA light node

The DA light node is a standalone service which performs these categories of operations:

> 1. Write: the light node sequences the signed protoBlocks submitted by authorized nodes in a locally ordered mempool to periodically write them, sequenced in L2 blocks, to the data availability layer.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Write: the light node forwards signed transaction-batches, which are submitted by authorized nodes, to the data availability layer.
```

> 2. Read: the light node reads the blobs from the data availability layer and verifies them against its verification parameters, currently by verifying a trusted signature.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Read: the light node reads the blobs from the data availability layer and verifies them against its verification parameters, currently by verifying a trusted signature. We call the set of transaction-batches (which are now ordered by the DA) a protoBlock.
```
